this gentleman may I just begin by
saying how touched I am have been asked
to say a few words of this conference
for this reason I am particularly sorry
that I cannot actually be with you in
person especially since the issues that
we discussed over the next day or two
are of critical importance the eat
Stockholm food forum should be commended
for encouraging discussions that
highlight the interconnected nature of
food health and sustainability there is
no doubt surely that the way we produce
our food lies at the very heart of
sustainability what we eat is directly
linked to so many critical issues facing
the world today everything from how we
curb the emission of greenhouse gases
and ensure the health of soil to how we
improve people's nutrition and enable
nature's vital biodiversity to thrive
sadly at the moment all of these issues
are hampered by the way much of our food
is produced the fact that there are now
more people who are obese than a hungry
that agriculture is paradoxically both a
cause and a casualty of climate change
that industrialized farming systems are
destroying the very soils we need to
grow things for generations to come
all demonstrate that we have to find a
more durable and beneficial way of
producing food in the future now for
what it is worth I I have long felt that
creating a transition to a more
sustainable food system would be much
easier if it was more widely understood
that our century long obsession with
producing cheap food has actually
produced quite the opposite
poor health polluted water and
diminished biodiversity or just some of
the enormous cost societies have to bear
because of the way we have chosen to
farm and feed ourselves we are not short
of evidence of how all these problems
have grown over the decades but nor are
we at a loss as to what the solutions
might be
I've seen many inspiring examples of how
genuinely sustainable agriculture
agriculture rural development
conservation and good human health can
all be pursued together and I know there
are many positive ways for that would
pay dividends to consumers the natural
world and to farmers so it seems to me
ladies and gentlemen that the question
is no longer what we need to do but why
it isn't happening on a bigger scale the
answer is actually very simple for as
long as it remains more profitable to
produce food using the kind of intensive
production methods which are damaging to
the environment and to human health then
it is to farm in a sustainable way
then producers will simply go on doing
that because they have to follow the
most profitable option so it follows
directly from this that the greatest
single barrier preventing a mainstream
switch to healthy sustainable food
systems is economic and if there is one
single issue which I would urge you to
concentrate on at your conference it is
working out how it might be possible to
introduce a series of economic and posit
policy measures both carrots and sticks
the end point of which would be a better
business case for sustainable healthy
food production to achieve this we will
need to identify and put a price on the
damaging consequences arising from our
present unsustainable food systems in
relation to greenhouse gas emissions
water pollution destruction of natural
capital such as soul carbon and
biodiversity and find ways in which we
could ensure that the farming systems
whose practices caused damaging outcomes
pay the full cost of these conversely
those systems which reduce emissions and
other forms of pollution increased soil
carbon and enhance biodiversity need to
be financially rewarded for so doing
this
incidentally is known as full cost
accounting or accounting for
sustainability and would mean that the
food we consume would then actually be
at the price that reflects the real cost
of production so it is my sincere hope
that you're gathering this week we'll
begin to provide some direction as to
how creating such circumstances might be
possible in order that we can stimulate
tangible changes in the way we approach
this most fundamental questions namely
the urgent need to develop and bring to
scale food production systems which
benefit not only human health but the
health of the wider environment and
critical ecosystems on which our futures
ultimately depend I could any wish you
the greatest of success